[Freelance Blog Post] Cheapest AIO tools (#17437)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/cheapest-ai-observability-tools.mdx

Reviewer: For "cheap" I might also expect how it scales, how do costs increase after the free tier?

Author: I'm keeping this out for this piece, partially because it's a pandora box right now with pricing changes happening on AIO, partially because it will add a lot of complexity to get this shipped since the pricing models vary a lot per competitor

Reviewer: add some backlinks here?

---
title: 'Cheapest AI observability tools for developers, compared'
date: 2026-06-16
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
    - rishi-raj-jain
    - natalia-amorim
featuredImage: >-
    https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/ai_powered_features_13eba8675a.jpg
featuredImageType: full
category: General
tags:
    - Comparisons
seo:
    {
        metaTitle: 'Cheapest AI observability tools for developers, compared',
        metaDescription: 'Compare the cheapest AI observability tools for developers, including PostHog, Langfuse, and Datadog. See which stay free and which convert to paid trials.',
    }
---

> Teams shipping AI features run into the same blind spots: latency, token costs, and model failures don't show up anywhere until a user runs into them first. [AI observability tools](/ai-observability) are how you see them coming.

Reviewer: Intro is better, thanks!

```suggestion
Teams shipping AI features run into the same blind spots: latency, token costs, and model failures don't show up until a user runs into them. [AI observability tools](/ai-observability) are how you see them coming.
```

> A lot of LLM observability tools like to flex their "free" muscles, but "free" can mean a lot of things; it can be as generous as 100,000 events a month with no seat limit ([yes, really](/pricing)), or as limited can mean a 24-hour data window and a single seat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lot of LLM observability tools like to flex their "free" muscles, but "free" can mean a lot of things; it can be as generous as 100,000 events a month with no seat limit ([yes, really](/pricing)), or as limited as a 24-hour retention window and a single seat.
```

This guide ranks these tools by how far their free tiers actually take you.

> If you specifically want open source, we have a separate guide to [the best free open-source LLM observability tools](/blog/best-open-source-llm-observability-tools).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you specifically want open source, we have a separate guide to [the best free open source LLM observability tools](/blog/best-open-source-llm-observability-tools).
```

## What features do you need in an AI observability tool?

At a minimum, a useful AI observability tool should:

- Capture LLM traces with input, output, latency, and token counts
- Track cost per model and per user

> - Visualize aggregate metrics (P50/P99 latency, error rates, total spend)

Reviewer: For consistency
```suggestion
- Visualize aggregate metrics (p50/p99 latency, error rates, total spend)
```

- Support the LLM providers you actually use (OpenAI, Anthropic, and others)
- Offer free access without requiring a credit card

The best tools go further with:

- **Prompt management:** Version prompts without redeploying code
- **Evaluations:** Score outputs with LLM-as-judge, human annotations, or automated metrics
- **User and session context:** Tie model behavior to [product analytics](/product-analytics), [session replay](/session-replay), or [feature flags](/feature-flags)

> - **Dataset curation and experiments:** Build golden datasets from production traces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Dataset curation:** Build golden datasets from production traces
```

- **Self-hosting:** Keep all data in your own infrastructure for privacy or compliance

## AI observability tools with the best free tiers

### 1. PostHog

> **[PostHog](/)** is an all-in-one developer platform where [AI observability](/llm-analytics) sits alongside [product analytics](/product-analytics), [session replay](/session-replay), [feature flags](/feature-flags), [experiments](/experiments), [error tracking](/error-tracking), [logs](/logs), and more. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**[PostHog](/)** is an all-in-one developer platform where [AI observability](/ai-observability) sits alongside [product analytics](/product-analytics), [session replay](/session-replay), [feature flags](/feature-flags), [experiments](/experiments), [error tracking](/error-tracking), [logs](/logs), and more. 
```

> Since LLM data is stored as [regular events](/docs/data/events), you can connect data such as model spend to user behavior, replay sessions where an agent failed, and ship prompt changes behind a feature flag without ever having to switch between tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since LLM data is stored as [regular events](/docs/data/events), you can connect it to user behavior, replay sessions where an agent failed, and ship prompt changes behind a feature flag without ever having to switch between tools.
```

PostHog's [AI Evals](/docs/ai-evals/evaluations) score outputs with LLM-as-judge or your own code, and run automatically after a prompt or model change to catch the quality regressions that error rates miss.

> And because [PostHog AI](/ai) and the [MCP server](/docs/model-context-protocol) read your trace data, you can ask questions in plain English such as "what were my most expensive calls yesterday?" directly from your code editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And because [PostHog AI](/ai) and the [MCP server](/docs/model-context-protocol) can read your trace data, you can ask questions in plain English such as "what were my most expensive calls yesterday?" directly from your code editor.
```

**Free tier:** [PostHog's free plan](/pricing) includes 100K LLM events per month, unlimited seats, and 30 day retention.

**Strengths:**

> - Every LLM event is a standard PostHog event, so it's all available to custom SQL, dashboards, and alerts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Every LLM event is a standard PostHog event, so it's all available to query with SQL, add to dashboards, and set up alerts on
```

- Spend tracking down to cost per conversation, p95/p99 latency views, and LLM errors auto-captured in [error tracking](/error-tracking)

> - Trace summarization plus plain-language querying through [PostHog AI](/ai) and the [MCP server](/docs/model-context-protocol), so you can debug from your editor

Reviewer: We already say this exact thing, so we can remove
```suggestion
```

- No per-seat pricing, usage-based billing with [spend limits](/pricing) you set, and free credits for early-stage companies via [PostHog for Startups](/startups)

<CalloutBox icon="IconStarFilled" title="PostHog is best for..." type="fyi">

Teams building AI features inside a real product who want traces, evals, and cost tracking wired into the analytics, replay, and error data they already collect.

</CalloutBox>

<WizardCTA />

### 2. Langfuse

> **Langfuse** is a focused LLM engineering platform for tracing, prompt management, datasets, and evals – early in this category and still the benchmark for depth in LLM-native workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Langfuse** is a focused LLM engineering platform for tracing, prompt management, datasets, and evals. It was early in this category and still the benchmark for depth in LLM-native workflows.
```

It offers prompt versioning and A/B testing, LLM-as-judge scoring, human annotation workflows, and dataset-based experiments, all in an OpenTelemetry-native platform.

What separates Langfuse from simple cost trackers is the depth of its eval and dataset workflows. You can build versioned test sets from production traces, run LLM-as-judge or heuristic scorers on live data or in offline experiments, and route human annotation through review queues.

**Free tier:** The Hobby plan includes 50K billable units per month (traces, spans, events, and scores all count), 30 days of data access, and 2 users.

**Strengths:**

- Tracing, prompts, datasets, evals, and annotation queues in one mature product
- Python and JS SDKs, OpenTelemetry, and most major agent frameworks supported
- Self-host core Langfuse features in your own infra for free

<details>

> <summary>Quick PostHog vs Langfuse free tier comparison</summary>

Reviewer: This is better :)

- PostHog has 100K free events/month, Langfuse has 50K free events/month
- PostHog includes unlimited free seats, Langfuse includes 2 free seats
- Both include 30-day free data retention
- Both have an evergreen free tier

</details>

<CalloutBox icon="IconStarFilled" title="Langfuse is best for..." type="fyi">

Teams that want a dedicated, open-source LLM engineering platform with deep evaluation and prompt-management workflows.

</CalloutBox>

### 3. Traceloop (OpenLLMetry)

> **Traceloop** is a managed backend that ingests those spans from OpenLLMetry an Apache-2.0 OpenTelemetry layer for LLM apps. The catch is retention: trace data disappears every 24 hours, making it useful for active debugging rather than long-term monitoring. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Traceloop** is a managed backend that ingests spans from OpenLLMetry an Apache-2.0 OpenTelemetry layer for LLM apps. The catch is retention: trace data disappears every 24 hours, making it useful for active debugging rather than long-term monitoring. 
```

For persistent observability, point OpenLLMetry at PostHog, Langfuse, or your own backend instead.

OpenLLMetry's appeal is that it speaks plain OpenTelemetry. Pre-built instrumentations for many popular LLM, vector, and agent libraries are available across multiple programming languages, and spans can flow to any OpenTelemetry-compatible backend or your own collector.

> **Free tier:** The Free Forever plan includes 50,000 spans per month, up to 5 seats, and 24-hour data retention only.

Reviewer: I think we need to reground ourselves on traceloop here
```suggestion
**Free tier:** The Free Forever plan for Traceloop includes 50,000 spans per month, up to 5 seats, and 24-hour data retention only.
```

**Strengths:**
- OpenTelemetry-first, so it fits teams that already standardize on OTel

> - 50k free spans a month rivals Langfuse on raw volume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 50K free spans a month rivals Langfuse on raw volume
```

- Not locked into Traceloop's UI if you self-route telemetry

<details>
<summary>Quick PostHog vs Traceloop free tier comparison</summary>

- PostHog has 100K free events/month, Traceloop has 50K free events/month
- PostHog includes unlimited free seats, Traceloop includes 5 free seats
- PostHog includes 30-day free data retention, Traceloop includes 24-hour free data retention
- Both have an evergreen free tier

</details>

<CalloutBox icon="IconStarFilled" title="Traceloop is best for..." type="fyi">

Developers who want vendor-neutral, OpenTelemetry-native instrumentation they can route to any backend, rather than a long-term monitoring home of its own.

</CalloutBox>

### 4. Arize (Phoenix)

**Arize** built Phoenix, a popular open source AI observability project with no limits on traces, retention, or users when self-hosted.

> AX Free is the hosted version of that same project for teams who would rather not run infra, and it adds online (production) evaluations that the local OSS build does not include.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AX Free is the hosted version of that same project for teams who would rather not run infra, and it adds online (production) evaluations that the local open source build does not include.
```

### 5. Lunary

**Lunary** is a lean observability layer for LLM apps with prompts, analytics, human review, and agent tracing. Alongside tracing and cost tracking per user, session, and model, it threads conversations so you can follow a full multi-turn exchange, and it collects feedback directly from end users rather than only from internal annotators.

It is simpler than Langfuse or Phoenix, which is the point: a refined layer for teams that want conversation-level threading and prompt collaboration without a heavyweight platform.

**Free tier:** Lunary Free includes 10,000 events per month, 1 seat, and 30-day log retention.

**Strengths:**
- Simple, one-line integration to get started
- Built-in prompt management
- Conversation threading and end-user feedback capture for chat and RAG apps

<details>
<summary>Quick PostHog vs Lunary free tier comparison</summary>

- PostHog has 100K free events/month, Lunary has 10K free events/month
- PostHog includes unlimited free seats, Lunary includes 1 free seat
- Both include 30-day free data retention
- Both have an evergreen free tier

</details>

<CalloutBox icon="IconStarFilled" title="Lunary is best for..." type="fyi">

> Solo developers building chatbots or RAG apps who want lightweight tracing, prompt management, and conversation threading without a heavyweight platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Solo developers building chatbots or RAG apps who want simple platform for lightweight tracing, prompt management, and conversation threading. 
```

</CalloutBox>

### 6. HoneyHive

> **HoneyHive** targets production agent observability with OpenTelemetry-native ingestion, evals, and prompt studio features. It shows up in enterprise case studies but still offers a self-serve developer tier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**HoneyHive** targets production agent observability with OpenTelemetry-native ingestion, evals, and prompt studio features. It mostly deals with enterprises but still offers a self-serve developer tier.
```

It auto-instruments providers and tools like OpenAI, Anthropic, and Pinecone. HoneyHive then captures every prompt, retrieval, tool call, and model output as OpenTelemetry spans, and lets you run the same evaluators offline on datasets and online against live traffic. Because it is OTel-native, it stays agnostic across models, frameworks, and clouds with no lock-in.

**Free tier:** The Developer plan includes 10,000 events per month, up to 5 users, 30-day retention, and the full observability and eval suite.

**Strengths:**
- OTel-native, with 50+ library integrations including LangChain and the OpenAI Agents SDK
- 5 users on the free tier, better for tiny teams than single-seat hobby plans
- CI/CD integration to run automated quality checks in your deployment pipeline

<details>
<summary>Quick PostHog vs HoneyHive free tier comparison</summary>

- PostHog has 100K free events/month, Lunary has 10K free events/month
- PostHog includes unlimited free seats, Lunary includes 1 free seat
- Both include 30-day free data retention

> - Both have an evergreen free tier

Reviewer: These details are Lunary, not HoneyHive

**Free tier:** The Developer plan includes 5,000 traces per month, 1 seat, 1 workspace, and 14-day base trace retention.

**Strengths:**
- SmithDB trace queries for sub-second lookups across millions of traces at scale
- Deep LangChain integration across tracing, evals, prompt hub, and deployment tooling
- Natural fit if you deploy agents on LangGraph and LangSmith infrastructure

<details>
<summary>Quick PostHog vs LangSmith free tier comparison</summary>

- PostHog has 100K free events/month, LangSmith has 5K free events/month
- PostHog includes unlimited free seats, LangSmith includes 1 free seat
- PostHog includes 30-day free data retention, LangSmith includes 14-day free data retention
- Both have an evergreen free tier

</details>

<CalloutBox icon="IconStarFilled" title="LangSmith is best for..." type="fyi">

Teams building on LangChain or LangGraph who want first-party tracing, evaluation, and agent deployment in one tightly integrated platform.

</CalloutBox>

### 8. Braintrust

> **Braintrust** focuses on tracing, evals, and scoring with a strong Loop agent story for automated quality work. It is popular with teams that treat evals as product infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Braintrust** focuses on tracing, evals, and scoring with a strong AI analysis assistant for automated quality work. It is popular with teams that treat evals as product infrastructure.
```

> Its Loop agent generates scorers, prompts, and datasets from plain-language descriptions and mines production logs for failure patterns, so you are not hand-writing evaluation logic from scratch. Every agent run can be scored asynchronously in production across dimensions like correctness, safety, and efficiency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its "Loop" assistant agent generates scorers, prompts, and datasets from plain-language descriptions and mines production logs for failure patterns, so you are not hand-writing evaluation logic from scratch. Every agent run can be scored asynchronously in production across dimensions like correctness, safety, and efficiency.
```

**Free tier:** The Starter plan includes $10 in monthly credits, 1 GB processed data, 10,000 scores per month, 14-day retention, and unlimited users and projects.

**Strengths:**
- Unlimited users on the free plan, rare in this list
- Scores-and-evals-first UX, strong for teams measuring output quality

> - SOC 2 Type II and Multi-factor authentication (MFA) on the free tier

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SOC 2 Type II and multi-factor authentication (MFA) on the free tier
```

- **HoneyHive** for up to 5 seats on the free tier and collaborative evaluation workflows once more than one person is grading outputs
- **Langfuse** when the team lives in Python notebooks and agent repos and wants the deepest open-source prompt and eval tooling

#### For teams building multi-step agents

- **LangSmith** for the deepest tracing if you're on LangChain or LangGraph: node-by-node state diffs and full execution graphs
- **HoneyHive** for OTel-native agent traces and evals you can run online against live traffic
- **Braintrust** when you want every agent run scored on correctness, safety, and efficiency

#### For evals-first teams

- **Braintrust** when evaluation is core product infrastructure, with scoring and experiments front and center (unlimited users on the free plan)
- **PostHog** for LLM-as-judge and code-based evals that run automatically after a prompt or model change
- **Langfuse** for LLM-as-judge, human annotation queues, and dataset experiments in an open-source platform

#### For enterprises with compliance needs

> - **Datadog** or **Dynatrace** when you already run their platform and want LLM traces beside infrastructure and APM telemetry (expect per-host platform pricing)

Reviewer: Since we don't include it anymore
```suggestion
- **Datadog** when you already run their platform and want LLM traces beside infrastructure and APM telemetry (expect per-host platform pricing)
```

- **PostHog** for [CDP](/cdp), [data warehouse](/data-stack), and AI observability under one vendor, with self-host and EU hosting for data residency

> - **Fiddler AI** when real-time guardrails and AI governance matter as much as observability

Reviewer: Same
```suggestion
```

<WizardCTA />

## Frequently asked questions

<details>
<summary>Do all AI observability tools have a free tier?</summary>

No. Some only offer a free trial (usually 14 to 30 days) that then converts to a paid plan or a hard downgrade.

A real free tier is different: you can keep using the product indefinitely within published limits on events, spans, seats, and retention. The most generous belong to **PostHog** (100,000 events a month with unlimited seats) and **Langfuse** (50,000 units a month with full feature access), with **HoneyHive**, **Braintrust**, **Lunary**, and self-hosted **Phoenix** also worth a look.

A few plans sit in between; they're technically free, but tight enough that most teams outgrow them fast, like Traceloop's 24-hour retention or LangSmith's single-seat cap.

> For tools you can run yourself at no cost, see our guide to [the best free open-source LLM observability tools](/blog/best-open-source-llm-observability-tools).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For tools you can run yourself at no cost, see our guide to [the best free open source LLM observability tools](/blog/best-open-source-llm-observability-tools).
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>What is the difference between LLM observability and AI evaluation?</summary>

**LLM observability** focuses on what happened in production: traces, costs, latency, error rates, and user behavior. 

**AI evaluation** focuses on whether what happened was good: scoring responses for quality, factual accuracy, safety, or task completion. 

You usually want both, and roughly in that order – evaluation only starts making sense once you can actually see the outputs you're scoring. For the longer version, see our explainer on [what AI observability is and how it works](/blog/what-is-ai-observability).

</details>

<details>
<summary>Which AI observability tool has the most generous free tier?</summary>

**PostHog** leads with **100,000 AI observability events** per month and unlimited team members on its [free plan](/pricing). 

**Langfuse** follows at **50,000** units per month with full feature access. 

</details>

<details>
<summary>Is there a fully open-source AI observability tool?</summary>

Yes. **Langfuse**, **Traceloop**, **Phoenix**, and **PostHog** all offer open-source cores. 

> See our guide to [open-source LLM observability tools](/blog/best-open-source-llm-observability-tools) for a feature-by-feature comparison.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See our guide to [open source LLM observability tools](/blog/best-open-source-llm-observability-tools) for a feature-by-feature comparison.
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>What's the cheapest AI observability tool for a side project?</summary>

**PostHog**, **Lunary**, and **Langfuse** are strong $0 options for side projects. 

Pick PostHog if you also need [product analytics](/product-analytics), [web analytics](/web-analytics), [error tracking](/error-tracking), and [session replay](/session-replay). 

For a fuller walkthrough of what to instrument first, how to tie LLM data to product analytics, and when a free tier stops being enough, see our guide to [AI observability for your MVP](/blog/ai-observability-for-mvps).

</details>

<details>
<summary>Which AI observability tools require a credit card?</summary>

None of the active evergreen free tiers in this guide require a card to start, including PostHog, Langfuse and LangSmith. 

> You only need a card when you upgrade past free limits or start a **paid trial** like Dynatrace or W&B (Weave).

Reviewer: Need to update these references, maybe Datadog?

---
title: 'Cheapest AI observability tools for developers, compared'
date: 2026-06-09
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
    - rishi-raj-jain
    - natalia-amorim
featuredImage: >-
    https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/ai_powered_features_13eba8675a.jpg
featuredImageType: full
category: General
tags:
    - Comparisons
seo:
    {
        metaTitle: 'Cheapest AI observability tools for developers, compared',
        metaDescription: 'Compare the cheapest AI observability tools for developers, including PostHog, Langfuse, and Datadog. See which stay free and which convert to paid trials.',
    }
---

> Every developer shipping AI features hits the same wall: you cannot trust what you cannot see. Latency spikes, token costs, and model failures stay invisible until users notice them first. That is what [AI observability tools](/ai-observability) are for.

Reviewer: you cannot trust what you cannot see is cliche

Reviewer 2: I sorta like it but what do you think of:

```
Shipping an AI feature is easy. Figuring out why it's burning through tokens, taking nine seconds to respond, or confidently inventing a refund policy you don't have is harder, and ordinary monitoring won't tell you. [AI observability tools](/ai-observability) track what happens between your prompt and your user's complaint.
```

Reviewer 2: OR

```
If you've shipped traditional APIs before, LLM features change what "working" means. Your endpoint can return 200 while the model burns through tokens, responds slowly, or invents facts your app never provided. Standard monitoring won't surface any of that. [AI observability tools](/ai-observability) add a layer that tracks the full lifecycle of each call: input, output, latency, cost, and errors.
```

Most of these tools advertise "free" on their landing pages, but that can mean 100,000 events with year-long retention just as easily as a 24-hour data window, a single-seat cap, or credit-based billing that runs out fast.

This guide ranks AI observability tools by how generous their free tiers actually are, and separates real free plans (the ones you can keep using indefinitely within their limits) from more restrictive trials.

> If you're interested in open-source solutions specifically, check out our guide to [the best free open-source LLM observability tools](/blog/best-open-source-llm-observability-tools).

Reviewer: Could we make this intro a bit more fun? Right now it reads like any other company's intro.

## What features do you need in an AI observability tool?

At a minimum, a useful AI observability tool should:

- Capture LLM traces with input, output, latency, and token counts
- Track cost per model and per user
- Visualize aggregate metrics (P50/P99 latency, error rates, total spend)
- Support the LLM providers you actually use (OpenAI, Anthropic, and others)

> - Offer free access without requiring a credit card

Reviewer: It's a bit weird that these don't have **bolded** feature names but the next set do

Reviewer: Also, does every tool have these features? If so, we should say that.

Reviewer 2: Ah, it's the style of writing that section that I took from https://posthog.com/blog/best-error-tracking-tools#what-features-do-you-need-in-your-error-tracking-tool where the points in further are bolded.

The best tools go further with:

- **Prompt management:** Version prompts without redeploying code
- **Evaluations:** Score outputs with LLM-as-judge, human annotations, or automated metrics
- **User and session context:** Tie model behavior to [product analytics](/product-analytics), [session replay](/session-replay), or [feature flags](/feature-flags)

> - **Dataset curation and experiments:** Build golden datasets from production traces

Reviewer: What are dataset experiments?

Reviewer 2: References:

- https://arize.com/blog/from-production-traces-to-better-ai-agents-automating-the-llmops-feedback-loop/
<img width="837" height="122" alt="Screenshot 2026-06-14 at 11 55 08 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a4e1c519-818d-4fe5-b4e2-f286e67524c3" />

- https://medium.com/@federicomoreno613/golden-datasets-the-foundation-of-reliable-ai-evaluation-486ce97ce89d
<img width="840" height="586" alt="Screenshot 2026-06-14 at 11 55 49 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/60a6677a-ddb3-403a-856a-d4dd0b3f8b17" />

- **Self-hosting:** Keep all data in your own infrastructure for privacy or compliance

## Tools with a real free tier

These tools let you keep using the product indefinitely without paying, even when you hit caps.

### 1. PostHog

**[PostHog](/)** is an all-in-one developer platform where [AI observability](/llm-analytics) sits alongside [product analytics](/product-analytics), [session replay](/session-replay), [feature flags](/feature-flags), [experiments](/experiments), [error tracking](/error-tracking), [logs](/logs), and more. 

> Since LLM data is stored as regular events, you can connect data such as model spend to user behavior, replay sessions where an agent failed, and ship prompt changes behind a feature flag without ever having to switch between tools. 

Reviewer: readers won't know what "regular events" so I'd be hesitant to focus on them too much

Reviewer 2: I think it's an opportunity for us to include the link to https://posthog.com/docs/data/events as follows:

```
Since LLM data is stored as [PostHog events](https://posthog.com/docs/data/events), you ...
```

PostHog's [AI Evals](/docs/ai-evals/evaluations) score outputs with LLM-as-judge or your own code, and run automatically after a prompt or model change to catch the quality regressions that error rates miss.

And because [PostHog AI](/ai) and the [MCP server](/docs/model-context-protocol) read your trace data, you can ask questions in plain English such as "what were my most expensive calls yesterday?" directly from your code editor.

> PostHog's AI observability is newer than dedicated platforms like Langfuse or LangSmith, but the math is hard to argue with: there's no per-seat pricing (which is why most companies never pay a cent), and you're not juggling five separate free tiers to cover tracing, evals, errors, replay, and analytics.

Reviewer: I think all the information here is repeated in a few places so it's not super necessary to have this paragraph

Reviewer: also remove "the math"

Reviewer 2: Even though it's called at a few places, it makes sense for PostHog to say that in the leading section to seem fair/balanced to the readers. That's just how I think of this but of course the call is yours :)

Reviewer 2: In that case, I'd suggest we re-frame "but the math is hard to argue with" to "but the value proposition is straightforward"

<CalloutBox icon="IconStarFilled" title="PostHog is best for..." type="fyi">

Teams building AI features inside a real product who want traces, evals, and cost tracking wired into the analytics, replay, and error data they already collect.

</CalloutBox>

<WizardCTA />

### 2. Langfuse

<p>
<ProductComparisonTable
    competitors={[
        'posthog',
        'langfuse',
    ]}
    rows={[        {
            label: 'Evergreen free tier',
            description: 'Ongoing free plan (not time-limited trial).',
            values: [true, true],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free events/month',
            description: 'Monthly included events/usage on the free plan.',
            values: [
                '100K',
                '50K',
            ],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free data retention',
            description: 'Default data retention included on the free plan.',
            values: [
                '30 days',
                '30 days',
            ],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free seats',
            description: 'Included user seats on the free plan.',
            values: ['Unlimited', '2'],
        },
    ]}
/>

> </p>

Reviewer: 1. Comparing everything against PostHog feels awkward to me
2. I'd prefer if we just do a big table at the top of this section that compares them all if that''s possible

Reviewer 2: re: Comparison table, @natalia-amorim shared that single 12-tool comparison table at the top was too big and hence we cut it into smaller per-section chunks focusing on the pricing attributes

Reviewer 2: I kind of like the per-tool-comparison we have right now since it basically shows the readers in a very short glance what they need to know who are coming out with the buyer-intent, like for example the below is super clear if I was deciding between Langfuse or PostHog

<img width="770" height="380" alt="Screenshot 2026-06-14 at 12 03 06 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/87d754c1-b607-4655-9625-255e7cbb34e5" />

**Langfuse** is a focused LLM engineering platform for tracing, prompt management, datasets, and evals – early in this category and still the benchmark for depth in LLM-native workflows.

> It offers prompt versioning and A/B testing, LLM-as-judge scoring, human annotation workflows, and dataset-based experiments, all in an OpenTelemetry-native platform that is MIT-licensed and self-hostable at scale.

Reviewer 2: From https://github.com/langfuse/langfuse/blob/main/ee/LICENSE, it's not super clear if the entire platform is self-hostable since some parts are for enterprise, so we'd want to reframe the above as follows:

"It offers prompt versioning and A/B testing, LLM-as-judge scoring, human annotation workflows, and dataset-based experiments, all in an OpenTelemetry-native platform."

What separates Langfuse from simple cost trackers is the depth of its eval and dataset workflows. You can build versioned test sets from production traces, run LLM-as-judge or heuristic scorers on live data or in offline experiments, and route human annotation through review queues.

**Free tier:** The Hobby plan includes 50K billable units per month (traces, spans, events, and scores all count), 30 days of data access, and 2 users.

**Strengths:**

- Tracing, prompts, datasets, evals, and annotation queues in one mature product
- Python and JS SDKs, OpenTelemetry, and most major agent frameworks supported

> - Self-host the same codebase locally or in your own infra for free

Reviewer 2: From https://github.com/langfuse/langfuse/blob/main/ee/LICENSE, it's not super clear if the entire platform is self-hostable so maybe we'd want to avoid this "self-host" part?

<CalloutBox icon="IconStarFilled" title="Langfuse is best for..." type="fyi">

Teams that want a dedicated, open-source LLM engineering platform with deep evaluation and prompt-management workflows.

</CalloutBox>

### 3. Traceloop (OpenLLMetry)

<p>
<ProductComparisonTable

>     competitors={['posthog', 'traceloop']}

Reviewer: For the comparison tables, we need to make sure the competitor is rendering correctly.

Reviewer: Also, most of the descriptions just repeat the labels, do we need them or can we make them more useful?

Reviewer: I think this makes the "Free tier" sentence in each section standalone better.

>     competitors={['posthog', 'traceloop']}

Reviewer 2: Can we use "Traceloop" instead of "traceloop"? This matches the case of the brand.

    rows={[
        {
            label: 'Evergreen free tier',
            description: 'Ongoing free plan (not time-limited trial).',
            values: [true, true],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free events/month',

>             description: 'Monthly included events/usage on the free plan.',

Reviewer: We are probably one of the only tools that calls them "events", maybe this description can explain that

            values: ['100K', '50K'],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free data retention',
            description: 'Default data retention included on the free plan.',
            values: ['30 days', '24 hours'],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free seats',
            description: 'Included user seats on the free plan.',
            values: ['Unlimited', '5'],
        },
    ]}
/>
</p>

OpenLLMetry is an Apache-2.0 OpenTelemetry layer for LLM apps. 

> **Traceloop** hosts a managed backend that ingests those spans, but the catch is retention: trace data disappears every 24 hours, making it useful for active debugging rather than long-term monitoring. 

Reviewer: I think this needs some smoothing out, let's do Traceloop first
```suggestion
**Traceloop** is a managed backend that ingests those spans from OpenLLMetry an Apache-2.0 OpenTelemetry layer for LLM apps. The catch is retention: trace data disappears every 24 hours, making it useful for active debugging rather than long-term monitoring. 
```

For persistent observability, point OpenLLMetry at PostHog, Langfuse, or your own backend instead.

OpenLLMetry's appeal is that it speaks plain OpenTelemetry. Pre-built instrumentations for many popular LLM, vector, and agent libraries are available across multiple programming languages, and spans can flow to any OpenTelemetry-compatible backend or your own collector.

**Free tier:** The Free Forever plan includes 50,000 spans per month, up to 5 seats, and 24-hour data retention only.

**Strengths:**

- OpenTelemetry-first, so it fits teams that already standardize on OTel
- 50k free spans a month rivals Langfuse on raw volume
- Not locked into Traceloop's UI if you self-route telemetry

<CalloutBox icon="IconStarFilled" title="Traceloop is best for..." type="fyi">

Developers who want vendor-neutral, OpenTelemetry-native instrumentation they can route to any backend, rather than a long-term monitoring home of its own.

</CalloutBox>

### 4. Arize (Phoenix)

<p>
<ProductComparisonTable

>     competitors={['posthog', 'arize']}

Reviewer 2: Can we use "Arize" instead of "arize"? This matches the case of the brand.

    rows={[
        {
            label: 'Evergreen free tier',
            description: 'Ongoing free plan (not time-limited trial).',
            values: [true, true],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free events/month',
            description: 'Monthly included events/usage on the free plan.',
            values: ['100K', '25K'],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free data retention',
            description: 'Default data retention included on the free plan.',

>             values: ['30 days', '7 days'],

Reviewer: Doesn't look quite right
https://arize.com/pricing/

<img width="2858" height="1400" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/486f3345-2cdf-4e75-927d-487fdf7fcb2b" />

```suggestion
            values: ['30 days', '15 days'],
```

Reviewer 2: Yes, you are right. I just checked this again, my bad.

        },
        {
            label: 'Free seats',
            description: 'Included user seats on the free plan.',
            values: ['Unlimited', '1'],
        },
    ]}
/>
</p>

**Arize** built Phoenix, a popular open source AI observability project with no limits on traces, retention, or users when self-hosted.

Phoenix is the open-source core: OpenTelemetry-based tracing, versioned datasets, experiments, a prompt playground, and built-in evaluators for faithfulness, relevance, hallucination, and toxicity, all runnable locally with no limits. 

> AX Free is the hosted version of that same project for teams who would rather not run infra, and it adds online (production) evaluations that the local OSS build does not include.

Reviewer: I think it's more confusing than helpful to focus on Phoenix, we should focus on Arize and AX Free

Reviewer 2: Can you share more? Since Arize's AX Free is the hosted version of Phoenix I believe it makes sense for us to describe what people actually get in the AI Observability space i.e. Phoenix and then compare the pricing i.e. of AX Free.

> **Free tier:** AX Free includes 25K spans per month, 1 GB ingestion per month, and 7-day retention.

Reviewer 2: "15-day"

**Strengths:**

- Strong OTel and framework integrations from the Phoenix OSS project
- Online evals on the free tier, with more eval depth than many hobby plans
- Upgrade path to enterprise ML observability if you later need ML and CV tooling beyond LLMs

<CalloutBox icon="IconStarFilled" title="Arize is best for..." type="fyi">

Teams already running Phoenix locally who want a hosted, OpenTelemetry-based observability layer with built-in evals and a path into broader ML monitoring.

</CalloutBox>

### 5. Lunary

<p>
<ProductComparisonTable

>     competitors={['posthog', 'lunary']}

Reviewer 2: Can we use "Lunary" instead of "lunary"? This matches the case of the brand.

    rows={[
        {
            label: 'Evergreen free tier',
            description: 'Ongoing free plan (not time-limited trial).',
            values: [true, true],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free events/month',
            description: 'Monthly included events/usage on the free plan.',
            values: ['100K', '10K'],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free data retention',
            description: 'Default data retention included on the free plan.',
            values: ['30 days', '30 days'],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free seats',
            description: 'Included user seats on the free plan.',
            values: ['Unlimited', '1'],
        },
    ]}
/>
</p>

**Lunary** is a lean observability layer for LLM apps with prompts, analytics, human review, and agent tracing. Alongside tracing and cost tracking per user, session, and model, it threads conversations so you can follow a full multi-turn exchange, and it collects feedback directly from end users rather than only from internal annotators.

> It is lighter than Langfuse or Phoenix, which is the point: a refined layer for teams that want conversation-level threading and prompt collaboration without a heavyweight platform.

Reviewer: What does "lighter" mean?

Reviewer 2: lighter means Lunary does less than Langfuse or Phoenix i.e. fewer features, narrower scope, and not trying to be a full LLM engineering platform

Reviewer 2: hence I ended the sentence with "heavyweight platform" but if we want to re-word "lighter", I suggest "less comprehensive" OR "simpler" OR "more focused"

> **Free tier:** Lunary Free includes 10,000 events per month, 1 seat, 1,000 prompt queries per month, and 30-day log retention.

Reviewer 2: can we remove the "1,000 prompt queries per month," since it's not available on the free plan but rather on the team plan

<img width="970" height="128" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e955c919-22ba-420a-a65c-10f4213867ab" />

**Strengths:**

- Simple, one-line integration to get started

> - Built-in prompt management, with 1,000 prompt queries a month on the free plan

Reviewer 2: let's remove this point since it's not available on the free plan but rather on the team plan

<img width="970" height="128" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e955c919-22ba-420a-a65c-10f4213867ab" />

- Conversation threading and end-user feedback capture for chat and RAG apps

<CalloutBox icon="IconStarFilled" title="Lunary is best for..." type="fyi">

Solo developers building chatbots or RAG apps who want lightweight tracing, prompt management, and conversation threading without a heavyweight platform.

</CalloutBox>

### 6. HoneyHive

<p>
<ProductComparisonTable

>     competitors={['posthog', 'honeyhive']}

Reviewer 2: Can we use "HoneyHive" instead of "honeyhive"? This matches the case of the brand.

    rows={[
        {
            label: 'Evergreen free tier',
            description: 'Ongoing free plan (not time-limited trial).',
            values: [true, true],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free events/month',
            description: 'Monthly included events/usage on the free plan.',
            values: ['100K', '10K'],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free data retention',
            description: 'Default data retention included on the free plan.',
            values: ['30 days', '30 days'],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free seats',
            description: 'Included user seats on the free plan.',
            values: ['Unlimited', '5'],
        },
    ]}
/>
</p>

**HoneyHive** targets production agent observability with OpenTelemetry-native ingestion, evals, and prompt studio features. It shows up in enterprise case studies but still offers a self-serve developer tier.

> It auto-instruments providers and tools like OpenAI, Anthropic, and Pinecone, captures every prompt, retrieval, tool call, and model output as OpenTelemetry spans, and lets you run the same evaluators offline on datasets and online against live traffic. Because it is OTel-native, it stays agnostic across models, frameworks, and clouds with no lock-in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It auto-instruments providers and tools like OpenAI, Anthropic, and Pinecone. HoneyHive then captures every prompt, retrieval, tool call, and model output as OpenTelemetry spans, and lets you run the same evaluators offline on datasets and online against live traffic. Because it is OTel-native, it stays agnostic across models, frameworks, and clouds with no lock-in.
```

**Free tier:** The Developer plan includes 10,000 events per month, up to 5 users, 30-day retention, and the full observability and eval suite.

**Strengths:**

- OTel-native, with 50+ library integrations including LangChain and the OpenAI Agents SDK
- 5 users on the free tier, better for tiny teams than single-seat hobby plans
- CI/CD integration to run automated quality checks in your deployment pipeline

> - SOC 2 Type II, HIPAA, GDPR, and self-host options on the Enterprise plan

Reviewer 2: let's remove this point since it's unfair to the platforms's enterprise tiers benefits not being outlined.

<CalloutBox icon="IconStarFilled" title="HoneyHive is best for..." type="fyi">

Small teams building production agents who want OpenTelemetry-native tracing and evaluation with a clear path to enterprise compliance.

</CalloutBox>

### 7. LangSmith

<p>
<ProductComparisonTable

>     competitors={['posthog', 'langsmith']}

Reviewer 2: Can we use "LangSmith" instead of "Langsmith" (how it's rendered)? This matches the case of the brand.

- Natural fit if you deploy agents on LangGraph and LangSmith infrastructure

<CalloutBox icon="IconStarFilled" title="LangSmith is best for..." type="fyi">

Teams building on LangChain or LangGraph who want first-party tracing, evaluation, and agent deployment in one tightly integrated platform.

</CalloutBox>

### 8. Braintrust

<p>
<ProductComparisonTable
    competitors={['posthog', 'braintrust']}
    rows={[
        {
            label: 'Evergreen free tier',
            description: 'Ongoing free plan (not time-limited trial).',
            values: [true, true],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free events/month',
            description: 'Monthly included events/usage on the free plan.',
            values: ['100K', 'Up to $10 credits'],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free data retention',
            description: 'Default data retention included on the free plan.',
            values: ['30 days', '14 days'],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free seats',
            description: 'Included user seats on the free plan.',
            values: ['Unlimited', 'Unlimited'],
        },
    ]}
/>
</p>

> **Braintrust** focuses on tracing, evals, and scoring with a strong Loop agent story for automated quality work. It is popular with teams that treat evals as product infrastructure.

Reviewer: what is "Loop agent story"

Author: I believe its referencing their agent https://www.braintrust.dev/blog/loop Loop is their Max

Its Loop agent generates scorers, prompts, and datasets from plain-language descriptions and mines production logs for failure patterns, so you are not hand-writing evaluation logic from scratch. Every agent run can be scored asynchronously in production across dimensions like correctness, safety, and efficiency.

**Free tier:** The Starter plan includes $10 in monthly credits, 1 GB processed data, 10,000 scores per month, 14-day retention, and unlimited users and projects.

**Strengths:**

- Unlimited users on the free plan, rare in this list

> - Scores-and-evals-first UX, strong for teams measuring output quality, not just uptime

Reviewer 2: let's remove ", not just uptime"?

> - Loop agent for automated eval and test generation on paid tiers

Reviewer 2: can we replace this paid-tier strength (unfair to other platforms strengths since we are highlighting the paid tier) with "SOC 2 Type II and Multi-factor authentication (MFA) on the free tier"

<img width="1350" height="804" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5b3b332b-b244-47bc-a72e-cb85b6dd77c7" />

<CalloutBox icon="IconStarFilled" title="Braintrust is best for..." type="fyi">

Teams that treat evaluation as core product infrastructure and want scoring, experiments, and automated eval generation front and center.

</CalloutBox>

> ## Tools with paid trials only

Reviewer: Do you think this section is necessary?

Like if I was looking for a cheap/free tool I wouldn't really care about free trials and it might confuse LLMs?

Dynatrace just completely unnecessary to include. Same with Fiddler.

Reviewer 2: I included them as part of the brief: 
<img width="719" height="178" alt="Screenshot 2026-06-14 at 12 19 31 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7a6694cd-de44-40b0-8dff-e52d68e2ae29" />
<img width="737" height="203" alt="Screenshot 2026-06-14 at 12 20 28 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/aadf6409-7699-4262-a368-cd4b7662e2b6" />

### 1. Datadog LLM Observability

<p>
<ProductComparisonTable
    competitors={['posthog', 'datadog']}
    rows={[
        {
            label: 'Evergreen free tier',
            description: 'Ongoing free plan (not time-limited trial).',
            values: [true, false],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free events/month',
            description: 'Monthly included events/usage on the free plan.',
            values: ['100K', '40K'],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free data retention',
            description: 'Default data retention included on the free plan.',
            values: ['30 days', '15 days'],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free seats',
            description: 'Included user seats on the free plan.',
            values: ['Unlimited', 'Unlimited'],
        },
    ]}
/>
</p>

[Datadog](/blog/best-datadog-alternatives) bolts LLM tracing onto its established APM and infrastructure platform. 

The appeal is correlation: LLM spans sit next to your application traces, host metrics, and logs, so an AI feature becomes one more layer in the same dashboards your ops team already watches.

> LLM Observability is one module inside Datadog's broader platform, sharing the same agents, dashboards, and alerting as its APM, infrastructure, and log products. 

Reviewer: These two paragraphs repeat themselves basically

Reviewer 2: I actually wanted to share how it's two fold: that as a concept the LLM is a layer in the dashboard that ops teams use and then second, focus on datadog's products that are actually being used

Reviewer 2: Yeah, let's remove the second para which focus on Datadog's products

Its Davis AI engine does causal root-cause analysis across the whole stack, and Grail, its data lakehouse, stores traces, logs, and metrics together so AI telemetry is queryable alongside everything else. For LLM apps, that means anomalies in latency, cost, or output quality get tied back to the underlying infrastructure automatically.

**Trial terms:** You get a 15-day free trial of the full platform plus a public sandbox (the Dynatrace Playground) to explore sample data, after which you need a paid subscription billed by usage, per host and per GiB.

**Strengths:**

- Application, infrastructure, and AI observability under one subscription
- Davis AI causal root-cause analysis is part of the platform, not an add-on tier
- Built for large estates with governance, RBAC, and support SLAs

<CalloutBox icon="IconStarFilled" title="Dynatrace is best for..." type="fyi">

Large enterprises already running Dynatrace who want AI and LLM monitoring unified with their application and infrastructure observability.

</CalloutBox>

### 3. Fiddler AI

<p>
<ProductComparisonTable

>     competitors={['posthog', 'fiddler']}

Reviewer 2: Can we use "Fiddler AI" instead of "fiddler" (how it's rendered)? This matches the case of the brand.

It targets regulated enterprises and government projects.

Fiddler's differentiator is that observability and security live in one control plane. Its Guardrails moderate prompts and responses in under 100ms using purpose-built scoring models to block prompt injection, jailbreaks, toxicity, and PII/PHI leakage, while hierarchical root-cause analysis drills from an application-level alert down to the specific agent span behind it.

**Pricing:** Fiddler does have a free plan, but it only covers real-time guardrails. AI observability itself – tracing and experiments – comes in on the paid Developer plan at $0.002 per trace, with no free allowance.

**Strengths:**

- Real-time guardrails against hallucinations, toxicity, PII/PHI, and prompt injection
- Built for regulated enterprises that need audit and safety controls
- Covers classic ML model monitoring alongside LLM and agent observability

<CalloutBox icon="IconStarFilled" title="Fiddler AI is best for..." type="fyi">

Regulated enterprises and government teams that need AI observability bundled with real-time guardrails and governance controls.

</CalloutBox>

### 4. Weights & Biases (Weave)

<p>
<ProductComparisonTable

>     competitors={['posthog', 'weave']}

Reviewer 2: Can we use "W&B (Weave)" instead of "weave" (how it's rendered)? This matches the case of the brand.

<img width="760" height="338" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d614da39-f074-49ad-bfeb-5b42c21bd097" />

    rows={[
        {
            label: 'Evergreen free tier',
            description: 'Ongoing free plan (not time-limited trial).',
            values: [true, false],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free events/month',
            description: 'Monthly included events/usage on the free plan.',
            values: ['100K', false],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free data retention',
            description: 'Default data retention included on the free plan.',
            values: ['30 days', false],
        },
        {
            label: 'Free seats',
            description: 'Included user seats on the free plan.',
            values: ['Unlimited', '5'],
        },
    ]}
/>

> </p>

Reviewer: I think this one needs another look, it seems to me they do have a free tier. 

<img width="1422" height="1210" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ebe33763-850a-4b75-9afe-a7a7c5976955" />

Reviewer 2: it is deceptive. that's why we've mentioned this
<img width="752" height="123" alt="Screenshot 2026-06-14 at 12 21 32 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ee93b94c-6916-43bf-b572-759423d3e30e" />

Reviewer 2: but i am not able to sign up and test this - their production seems to be down at the moment

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/805704df-4ec0-4e3c-b71f-9d47fb1217b8

Reviewer 2: let's remove the Weave section? i'm not super confident about this until we're able to sign up and verify their pricing page claims.

Reviewer: yeah

#### For early-stage startups

- **PostHog** for one platform from prototype to PMF: AI traces sit next to [experiments](/experiments), [error tracking](/error-tracking), [flags](/feature-flags), and [analytics](/product-analytics), plus free credits for qualifying companies via [PostHog for Startups](/startups)
- **HoneyHive** for up to 5 seats on the free tier and collaborative evaluation workflows once more than one person is grading outputs
- **Langfuse** when the team lives in Python notebooks and agent repos and wants the deepest open-source prompt and eval tooling

#### For teams building multi-step agents

- **LangSmith** for the deepest tracing if you're on LangChain or LangGraph: node-by-node state diffs and full execution graphs
- **HoneyHive** for OTel-native agent traces and evals you can run online against live traffic
- **Braintrust** when you want every agent run scored on correctness, safety, and efficiency

#### For evals-first teams

- **Braintrust** when evaluation is core product infrastructure, with scoring and experiments front and center (unlimited users on the free plan)

> - **PostHog** for LLM-as-judge and code-based  evals that run automatically after a prompt or model change

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **PostHog** for LLM-as-judge and code-based evals that run automatically after a prompt or model change
```

- **Langfuse** for LLM-as-judge, human annotation queues, and dataset experiments in an open-source platform

#### For enterprises with compliance needs

- **Datadog** or **Dynatrace** when you already run their platform and want LLM traces beside infrastructure and APM telemetry (expect per-host platform pricing)
- **PostHog** for [CDP](/cdp), [data warehouse](/data-stack), and AI observability under one vendor, with self-host and EU hosting for data residency
- **Fiddler AI** when real-time guardrails and AI governance matter as much as observability

<WizardCTA />

## Frequently asked questions

<details>

> <summary>What's the difference between a free tier and a free trial?</summary>

Reviewer: I don't think this one is necessary, people know this and not helpful for AEO

Reviewer 2: I believe this was part of the brief cc @natalia-amorim

A **free tier** lets you use the product indefinitely within published limits (events, spans, seats, retention). 

A **restricted free plan** is technically free but tight enough that most teams outgrow it fast. 

A **free trial** gives you fuller access for a fixed window, then requires payment or a hard downgrade.

</details>

<details>
<summary>What is the difference between LLM observability and AI evaluation?</summary>

**LLM observability** focuses on what happened in production: traces, costs, latency, error rates, and user behavior. 

**AI evaluation** focuses on whether what happened was good: scoring responses for quality, factual accuracy, safety, or task completion. 

> You usually want both, and roughly in that order – evaluation only starts making sense once you can actually see the outputs you're scoring. For the longer version, see our explainer on [what AI observability is and how it works](https://posthog.com/blog/what-is-ai-observability).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You usually want both, and roughly in that order – evaluation only starts making sense once you can actually see the outputs you're scoring. For the longer version, see our explainer on [what AI observability is and how it works](/blog/what-is-ai-observability).
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>Which AI observability tool has the most generous free tier?</summary>

**PostHog** leads with **100,000 AI observability events** per month and unlimited team members on its [free plan](/pricing). 

**Langfuse** follows at **50,000** units per month with full feature access. 

</details>

<details>
<summary>Is there a fully open-source AI observability tool?</summary>

Yes. **Langfuse**, **Traceloop**, **Phoenix**, and **PostHog** all offer open-source cores. 

See our guide to [open-source LLM observability tools](/blog/best-open-source-llm-observability-tools) for a feature-by-feature comparison.

</details>

<details>
<summary>What's the cheapest AI observability tool for a side project?</summary>

**PostHog**, **Lunary**, and **Langfuse** are strong $0 options for side projects. 

Pick PostHog if you also need [product analytics](/product-analytics), [web analytics](/web-analytics), [error tracking](/error-tracking), and [session replay](/session-replay). 

> For a fuller walkthrough of what to instrument first, how to tie LLM data to product analytics, and when a free tier stops being enough, see our guide to [AI observability for your MVP](https://posthog.com/blog/ai-observability-for-mvps).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a fuller walkthrough of what to instrument first, how to tie LLM data to product analytics, and when a free tier stops being enough, see our guide to [AI observability for your MVP](/blog/ai-observability-for-mvps).
```
